The Project Gutenberg eBook of Comparison of Woods for Butter Boxes,
by G. D. Turnbow

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Comparison of Woods for Butter Boxes

Author: G. D. Turnbow

Release Date: February 8, 2022 [eBook #67359]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Chris Jordan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images from the Home Economics Archive:
             Research, Tradition and History, Albert R. Mann Library,
             Cornell University)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMPARISON OF WOODS FOR
BUTTER BOXES ***





             =UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PUBLICATIONS=

                        COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE
                    AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION
                         BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA

                 COMPARISON OF WOODS FOR BUTTER BOXES

                        _By_ G. D. TURNBOW

[Illustration: Proper method of packing cartoned butter in 60-pound boxes]

                           BULLETIN No. 369
                             August, 1923

                    UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS
                               BERKELEY
                                 1923




                 COMPARISON OF WOODS FOR BUTTER BOXES

                                  BY

                             G. D. TURNBOW


Butter boxes used in shipping and storing butter in California, are
usually made of spruce which is largely shipped in from other states
particularly from Washington and Oregon.

With the recent war, however, there came an acute shortage of spruce
on the Pacific Coast with a corresponding increase in price. The
commercial manufacturers did some work in an attempt to find a
substitute for spruce, but the trade did not readily accept a change.
There was a demand from both the lumber and the butter interests for
investigation to find a suitable substitute for spruce.

The production of spruce is somewhat limited in California, but there
is an abundance of white fir and a limited amount of cottonwood
available. However, the creamerymen have not used white fir and
cottonwood to any extent for butter containers, on account of the
belief that these materials would impart a wood flavor to the butter.

Inasmuch as nearly all of the butter made in this State is shipped or
stored in wooden containers, the use of white fir or cottonwood, would
mean first, a material saving to the butter manufacturers in marketing
expense, and second, an opportunity for the lumber interests to use a
large amount of raw material already available in California, which
heretofore had been of little commercial value or use.


BUTTER ABSORBS ODOR

The volatile fats in butter have the property of absorbing odors,
which often results in an undesirable flavor. Great care then must be
exercised in keeping butter from coming in contact with materials that
will impart a foreign flavor. Butter need be exposed to foreign odors
only a short length of time before the flavor is permanently affected.

Experiments[A] were conducted, therefore, to determine whether white
fir or cottonwood would impart a flavor to the butter and also to
determine the possibility of storing butter in cubes and marketing it
in 60-pound cases when these woods were used.

[A] This experiment was suggested by Mr. M. B. Pratt, Deputy State
Forester. Through his coöperation, all box material was furnished by
the Swayne Lumber Company of Oroville and the Capitol Box Factory of
Sacramento.


CUBE BUTTER IN COLD STORAGE

The butter for cold storage was packed in white fir, cottonwood, and
spruce containers holding ten pounds each. Both seasoned and unseasoned
woods were used in each of the three methods of packing.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.—Butter packed in cubes paraffined and parchment
lined.]

The first set packed with butter were plain unseasoned boxes of each
of the woods. The second set had the inner surface paraffined before
packing. The method of paraffining was to invert the box over a steam
jet and steam thoroughly. This served a double purpose in that it
opened the pores of the wood and allowed the paraffin to penetrate, and
the heated surface of the wood kept the paraffin in a liquid condition
so that it could be put on in a thinner coat than if the paraffin had
been applied to a cold surface. After the boxes had been allowed to
drain, the inside was then painted with paraffin at 240° F. This method
gave a complete covering to the wood, a result which is not always
obtained by some of the commercial paraffin atomizers. The third set
was paraffined as above and, in addition, lined with good parchment
paper so that no butter could come in contact with either wood or
paraffin (fig. 1). Twenty-three 10-pound boxes were packed in the three
ways.

They were filled with the butter from one churning which scored 92½
after being chilled for 24 hours at 50° F. and were shipped immediately
after the first scoring to a cold storage plant in San Francisco and
stored at a temperature of 12° F. The butter was scored monthly for six
months. The summary of the scoring is given in table 1.


TABLE 1

Influence of Various Woods on Cube Butter in Storage[B]

[B] This scoring was done by T. J. Harris, San Francisco Dairy Produce
Exchange, S. L. Denning, Oakland, and G. D. Turnbow, College of
Agriculture, University of California.

=========================================================================
                                                            Average score
  No.    Kind                                               of butter in
  of      of         How          First  Lowest  Average of  same kind
 sample  wood       treated       score  score   all scores    of box
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
   1   White Fir   Unseasoned      92.5    89      90.857
                   No Paraffin
                   No Parchment
   2   Cottonwood  Unseasoned      92.5    86      89.214
                   No Paraffin
                   No Parchment
   3   Spruce      Unseasoned      92.5    88      90.785
                   No Paraffin
                   No Parchment
   4   Spruce      Seasoned        92.5    89      90.642
                   Paraffin
                   No Parchment
   6   White Fir   Seasoned        92.5    90      90.857
                   Paraffin
                   No Parchment
   7   Cottonwood  Seasoned        92.5    87      89.571
                   Paraffin
                   No Parchment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
   5   Cottonwood  Unseasoned      92.5    88      89.857
                   Paraffin
                   No Parchment
   8   Spruce      Unseasoned      92.5    90      90.928
                   Paraffin
                   No Parchment
   9   White Fir   Unseasoned      92.5    89      90.571
                   Paraffin
                   No Parchment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
  10    Cottonwood  Unseasoned      92.5   91.0     91.714
                   Paraffin
                   Parchment
  11   Cottonwood  Unseasoned      92.5   89.0     90.571         91.142
                   Paraffin
                   Parchment
  18   Cottonwood  Unseasoned      92.5   89.0     91.142
                   Paraffin
                   Parchment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
  12   Spruce      Unseasoned      92.5   90.5      91.5
                   Paraffin
                   Parchment
  13   Spruce      Unseasoned      92.5   91.0     91.571         91.333
                   Paraffin
                   Parchment
  14   Spruce      Unseasoned      92.5   90.0     90.928
                   Paraffin
                   Parchment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
  15   White Fir   Unseasoned      92.5  89.0     90.928
                   Paraffin
                   Parchment
  16   White Fir   Unseasoned      92.5  90.0     91.285         91.107
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
  17   White Fir   Seasoned        92.5  89.0     90.857         91.142
                   Paraffin
                   Parchment
  20   White Fir   Seasoned        92.5  90.5     91.428
                   Paraffin
                   Parchment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
  19   Cottonwood  Seasoned         92.5  90.5     91.571
                   Paraffin
                   Parchment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
  21   Spruce      Seasoned        92.5  90.0     91.214
                   Paraffin
                   Parchment
  22   Spruce      Seasoned        92.5  90.0     91.571         91.523
                   Paraffin
                   Parchment
  23   Spruce      Seasoned        92.5  91.0     91.785
                   Paraffin
                   Parchment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

SIXTY-POUND BOXES PACKED FOR MARKET The butter for market was cut into
two-pound squares, wrapped and packed in 60-pound containers, made of
white fir, cottonwood and spruce (figs. 2, 3 and 4). The butter was
stored in a cold room, the temperature of which ranged from 48° to 50°
F. It was held in storage twenty-eight days, which is within two days
of the maximum time butter may be held and still sold as fresh butter.
Butter held over thirty days must be labeled “storage butter.” The
butter was scored four times during the storage period. The butter used
was all from the same churning which scored 93 after being chilled for
twenty-four hours at 50° F.

Table 2 gives a summary of the scores showing the effect upon butter in
containers with varying treatments. When paraffined, the inside of the
boxes was painted with the paraffin at 240° F.


TABLE 2

Influence of Various Woods on Butter Packed in 60-Lb. Boxes[C]

[C] Butter scored by J. C. Marquardt and G. D. Turnbow of the College
of Agriculture, University of California.

=========================================================================
                                                                 Average
No. of                                          Highest  Lowest  of all
sample  Kind of wood      How treated            score   score   scores
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

  1   White Fir    Unseasoned, Not Paraffined     93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, Cartons
                   Box Lined with Wrapping Paper
  3   Cottonwood   Unseasoned, Not Paraffined     93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, Cartons
                   Box Lined with Wrapping Paper
  7   Spruce       Unseasoned, Not Paraffined     93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, Cartons
                   Box Lined with Wrapping Paper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
1-a   White Fir    Unseasoned, Not Paraffined      —       —        —
                   Parchment Wrapped, No Cartons
                   Box Lined with Parchment
3-a   Cottonwood   Unseasoned, Not Paraffined     93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, No Cartons
                   Box Lined with Parchment
7-a   Spruce       Unseasoned, Not Paraffined     93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, No Cartons
                   Box Lined with Parchment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
  2   White Fir    Seasoned, Not Paraffined       93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, Cartons
                   Box Lined with Wrapping Paper
  9   Cottonwood   Seasoned, Not Paraffined       93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, Cartons
                   Box Lined with Wrapping Paper
  8   Spruce       Seasoned, Not Paraffined       93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, Cartons
                   Box Lined with Wrapping Paper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
2-a   White Fir    Seasoned, Not Paraffined       93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, No Cartons
                   Box Lined with Parchment
9-a   Cottonwood   Seasoned, Not Paraffined       93      90       91.175
                   Parchment Wrapped, No Cartons
                   Box Lined with Parchment
8-a   Spruce       Seasoned, Not Paraffined       93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, No Cartons
                   Box Lined with Parchment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
  4   Cottonwood   Seasoned, Paraffined           93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, Cartons
                   Box Lined with Wrapping Paper
  5   White Fir    Seasoned, Box Paraffined       93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, Cartons
                   Box Lined with Wrapping Paper
  6   Spruce       Seasoned, Paraffined           93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, Cartons
                   Box Lined with Wrapping Paper
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
4-a   Cottonwood   Seasoned, Paraffined           93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, No Cartons
                   Box Lined with Parchment
5-a   White Fir    Seasoned, Paraffined           93      92.75    92.562
                   Parchment Wrapped, No Cartons
                   Box Lined with Parchment
6-a   Spruce       Seasoned, Paraffined           93      93       93
                   Parchment Wrapped, No Cartons
                   Box Lined with Parchment


NAILING OF BOXES

Five-penny cement-coated nails were used in making the boxes.
Practically no splitting was caused by the nails in unseasoned white
fir, spruce, or cottonwood. There was very little splitting in seasoned
cottonwood. The nails, however, caused a slight splitting in the
seasoned spruce and quite a noticeable splitting in the white fir, but
not enough in either to cause an appreciable loss.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.—Typical 60-pound white fir boxes showing general
run of this wood.]


CONCLUSIONS


Cube Butter in Cold Storage

_Boxes paraffined and parchment lined._—White fir and cottonwood can
be used in place of spruce for storing butter in cubes, when properly
seasoned, paraffined, and parchment lined.

Cottonwood is equal to spruce as a butter container. Butter stored in
cottonwood boxes for six months had an average score of 0.048 of a
point above spruce treated in the same manner.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.—Method of lining 60-pound boxes with paper.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.—Parchment wrapped butter in parchment lined
box.]

White fir may be used very successfully. It scored during the six
months’ storage only an average of 0.381 of a point below spruce.

In the final scoring, after six months’ storage, none of the cubes
packed in seasoned, paraffined and parchment lined containers received
a cut directly due to wood flavor.

Green or unseasoned white fir, cottonwood or spruce, may impart a
slight wood flavor to the butter when packed in cubes, even though they
are paraffined and parchment lined. The butter stored in unseasoned
cubes scored an average of 0.218 of a point below the butter stored in
seasoned boxes with the same treatment. While the average difference
was very small, in some cases there was a decided wood flavor which was
pronounced enough to affect materially the flavor of the butter.

_Boxes paraffined but not parchment lined._—Unseasoned boxes of white
fir, cottonwood and spruce, paraffined but not parchment lined are not
entirely satisfactory for storing butter. The butter so stored was
criticized in practically all cases for wood flavor. Butter stored
in white fir boxes scored 0.358 of a point lower than that in spruce
boxes, while butter in cottonwood boxes scored 1.071 lower than that
in spruce. Storing butter in cubes without parchment lining or in
cubes carelessly lined with parchment will cause objectionable flavors
regardless of the wood.

_Boxes neither paraffined nor parchment lined._—Butter allowed to come
in direct contact with any of the three untreated woods will always
take up wood flavor. The injury to the flavor is about equal from all
three woods.


Sixty-Pound Boxes Packed for Market

White fir is as good as spruce for 60-pound boxes when seasoned and
parchment lined, the butter being wrapped in parchment only. Cottonwood
is not quite as satisfactory as either spruce or white fir, there being
some criticism on the flavor of the butter.

Butter can be shipped in seasoned white fir or cottonwood boxes, lined
with ordinary wrapping paper, if the butter is parchment wrapped and
cartoned. There is no advantage in using parchment paper to line the
box.

Since there was practically no trouble experienced in the unparaffined
boxes, there is no advantage in paraffining the inside of the box.

Since the completion of the investigational work, approximately 40,000
white fir boxes have been used with entire satisfaction for shipping
butter at the University Farm.




STATION PUBLICATIONS AVAILABLE FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION


BULLETINS

  No.

  253. Irrigation and Soil Conditions in the Sierra Nevada Foothills,
       California.

  261. Melaxuma of the Walnut, “Juglans regia.”

  262. Citrus Diseases of Florida and Cuba Compared with those of
       California.

  263. Size Grades for Ripe Olives.

  268. Growing and Grafting Olive Seedlings.

  270. A Comparison of Annual Cropping, Biennial Cropping, and Green
       Manures on the Yield of Wheat.

  273. Preliminary Report on Kearney Vineyard Experimental Drain.

  275. The Cultivation of Belladonna in California.

  276. The Pomegranate.

  277. Sudan Grass.

  278. Grain Sorghums.

  279. Irrigation of Rice in California.

  280. Irrigation of Alfalfa in the Sacramento Valley.

  283. The Olive Insects of California.

  285. The Milk Goat in California.

  286. Commercial Fertilizers.

  287. Vinegar from Waste Fruits.

  294. Bean Culture in California.

  298. Seedless Raisin Grapes.

  304. A Study of the Effects of Freezes on Citrus in California.

  308. I. Fumigation with Liquid Hydrocyanic Acid. II. Physical and
       Chemical Properties of Liquid Hydrocyanic Acid.

  312. Mariout Barley.

  317. Selections of Stocks in Citrus Propagation.

  319. Caprifigs and Caprification.

  321. Commercial Production of Grape Syrup.

  324. Storage of Perishable Fruit at Freezing Temperatures.

  325. Rice Irrigation Measurements and Experiments in Sacramento
       Valley, 1914-1919.

  328. Prune Growing in California.

  331. Phylloxera-Resistant Stocks.

  334. Preliminary Volume Tables for Second-Growth Redwoods.

  335. Cocoanut Meal as a Feed for Dairy Cows and Other Livestock.

  336. The Preparation of Nicotine Dust as an Insecticide.

  337. Some Factors of Dehydrater Efficiency.

  339. The Relative Cost of Making Logs from Small and Large Timber.

  341. Studies on Irrigation of Citrus Groves.

  343. Cheese Pests and Their Control.

  344. Cold Storage as an Aid to the Marketing of Plums.

  347. The Control of Red Spiders in Deciduous Orchards.

  348. Pruning Young Olive Trees.

  349. A Study of Sidedraft and Tractor Hitches.

  350. Agriculture in Cut-over Redwood Lands.

  351. California State Dairy Cow Competition.

  352. Further Experiments in Plum Pollination.

  353. Bovine Infectious Abortion.

  354. Results of Rice Experiments in 1922.

  355. The Peach Twig Borer.

  357. A Self-mixing Dusting Machine for Applying Dry Insecticides and
       Fungicides.

  358. Black Measles, Water Berries, and Related Vine Troubles.

  359. Fruit Beverage Investigations.

  360. Gum Diseases of Citrus Trees in California.

  361. Preliminary Volume Tables for Second Growth Redwood.

  362. Dust and the Tractor Engine.

  363. The Pruning of Citrus Trees in California.

  364. Fungicidal Dusts for the Control of Bunt.

  365. Avocado Culture in California.


CIRCULARS

  No.

  70. Observations on the Status of Corn Growing in California.

  82. The Common Ground Squirrel of California.

  87. Alfalfa.

  111. The Use of Lime and Gypsum on California Soils.

  113. Correspondence Courses in Agriculture.

  117. The Selection and Cost of a Small Pumping Plant.

  127. House Fumigation.

  136. _Melilotus indica_ as a Green-Manure Crop for California.

  144. Oidium or Powdery Mildew of the Vine.

  151. Feeding and Management of Hogs.

  152. Some Observations on the Bulk Handling of Grain in California.

  153. Announcement of the California State Dairy Cow Competition,
       1916-18.

  154. Irrigation Practice in Growing Small Fruit in California.

  155. Bovine Tuberculosis.

  157. Control of the Pear Scab.

  159. Agriculture in the Imperial Valley.

  160. Lettuce Growing in California.

  161. Potatoes in California.

  164. Small Fruit Culture in California.

  165. Fundamentals of Sugar Beet Culture under California Conditions.

  166. The County Farm Bureau.

  167. Feeding Stuffs of Minor Importance.

  170. Fertilizing California Soils for the 1918 Crop.

  172. Wheat Culture.

  173. The Construction of the Wood-Hoop Silo.

  174. Farm Drainage Methods.

  175. Progress Report on the Marketing and Distribution of Milk.

  178. The Packing of Apples in California.

  179. Factors of Importance in Producing Milk of Low Bacterial Count.

  182. Extending the Area of Irrigated Wheat in California for 1918.

  184. A Flock of Sheep on the Farm.

  188. Lambing Sheds.

  190. Agriculture Clubs in California.

  193. A Study of Farm Labor in California.

  198. Syrup from Sweet Sorghum.

  199. Onion Growing in California.

  201. Helpful Hints to Hog Raisers.

  202. County Organizations for Rural Fire Control.

  203. Peat as a Manure Substitute.

  205. Blackleg.

  206. Jack Cheese.

  208. Summary of the Annual Reports of the Farm Advisors of California.

  209. The Function of the Farm Bureau.

  210. Suggestions to the Settler in California.

  212. Salvaging Rain-Damaged Prunes.

  214. Seed Treatment for the Prevention of Cereal Smuts.

  215. Feeding Dairy Cows in California.

  217. Methods for Marketing Vegetables in California.

  218. Advanced Registry Testing of Dairy Cows.

  219. The Present Status of Alkali.

  224. Control of the Brown Apricot Scale and the Italian Pear Scale on
       Deciduous Fruit Trees.

  228. Vineyard Irrigation in Arid Climates.

  230. Testing Milk, Cream, and Skim Milk for Butterfat.

  232. Harvesting and Handling California Cherries for Eastern Shipment.

  233. Artificial Incubation.

  234. Winter Injury to Young Walnut Trees during 1921-22.

  235. Soil Analysis and Soil and Plant Interrelations.

  236. The Common Hawks and Owls of California from the Standpoint of
       the Rancher.

  237. Directions for the Tanning and Dressing of Furs.

  238. The Apricot in California.

  239. Harvesting and Handling Apricots and Plums for Eastern Shipment.

  240. Harvesting and Handling Pears for Eastern Shipment.

  241. Harvesting and Handling Peaches for Eastern Shipment.

  242. Poultry Feeding.

  244. Central Wire Bracing for Fruit Trees.

  245. Vine Pruning Systems.

  247. Colonization and Rural Development.

  248. Some Common Errors in Vine Pruning and Their Remedies.

  249. Replacing Missing Vines.

  250. Measurement of Irrigation Water on the Farm.

  251. Recommendations Concerning the Common Diseases and Parasites of
       Poultry in California.

  252. Supports for Vines.

  253. Vineyard Plans.

  254. The Use of Artificial Light to Increase Winter Egg Production.

  255. Leguminous Plants as Organic Fertilizer in California
       Agriculture.

  256. The Control of Wild Morning Glory.

  257. The Small-Seeded Horse Bean.

  258. Thinning Deciduous Fruits.

  259. Pear By-products.

  260. A Selected List of References Relating to Irrigation in
       California.

  261. Sewing Grain Sacks.

  263. Tomato Production in California.




Transcriber’s notes:

In the text version, italics are represented by _underscores_, and bold
text by =equals= symbols.

The bulletins and circulars sections have been expanded from 2 columns
in small font to a single column to allow them to be more easily read.

The single occurrence of paraffine has been changed to paraffin for
consistency with general use in the text.


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMPARISON OF WOODS FOR BUTTER
BOXES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
